---
title: Nomadic programming 
--- 

DISCLAIMER: This is about my opinion.
And may or may not contain some boasting. And is also a bit of a brain
dump.

Yep, this is not a typo. Not monadic but
[nomadic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nomad "Nomad"). Although monads
are cool too.
A few days ago the
[CTO](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chief_technology_officer "Chief technology officer")
of a company I work for said it's time to specialize. He was talking
about my career. Offering me a few things to try and then pick one. But
this got me thinking.
Today another CTO told me that I'm "essentially a good dev" and that
chosen
[software](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_software "Computer software")
stack doesn't matter. And I agree. ([Patrick does
too](http://www.kalzumeus.com/2011/10/28/dont-call-yourself-a-programmer/)).

  ----------------------
  [![](http://www.thatericalper.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/years.jpg)](http://www.thatericalper.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/years.jpg)
  20 years later all this fits in your pocket
  ----------------------

I'm an [engineer](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Engineer "Engineer") not
a programmer(or god forbid, a
[coder](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Programmer "Programmer")). I solve
problems not just write code. It just happens that code is
[solution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solution "Solution") to most
problems I try to solve. World is increasingly more computer orientated.
Now everything(literally!) has a processor inside. But processors are
dumb. So you need people to program them. These people are the
equivalent of the [factory
workers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factory "Factory") before robots
started taking over. So now people need to migrate one level up on the
abstraction ladder. Labor is now mental. Not everything is the same(like
in a traditional factory) but it is the same concept. And you are
pumping out slightly different versions.  Welcome to a modern software
shop.
But all this "computerization" also pushes up the upper bound of
complexity. And this is where engineers kick in. If you have complex
solution you require (hopefully less) complex solutions. And you need
people who can manage this complexion. Not by being machines but by
understanding, inventing concepts and structuring them. Big software has
millions if not billions of moving parts. Imagine a machine of such
complexity. There probably isn't a human out there who could manage this
in it's entirety. But software engineers are expected to do this. You
need the ability to see something and relate it to known concepts or
invent a new concept and relate it to oter stuff. Connect things
together. And to do this well you need broad knowledge. Yes you need
specialization - depth - to do something very well but this is a lesser
problem. See a good engineer can go from zero to awesome in a new field
**very quickly**. Learning a new language can be done in a week and a
software stack in a bit more. I'm not saying you become an expert or the
very best in the field but if you have the urge to learn you are not far
behind. So a good engineer is the one who has the ability to learn and
to produce real solutions with this knowledge.


### Nomads

So where does nomadic programming fit into this philosophy? Going from
language to language, from framework to framwork and changing software
stacks. Not settling down. This (in my opinion) teaches you what can be
done and haw can stuff be done. In all possible ways. So you can figure
out the best solution. Learning all the time also keeps you on the
bleeding edge and this is fun and engaging. Having new toys all the
time! I can't image myself working with just one thing for the rest of
my life. Meeting new languages and new framework is what I do in my
[free time](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leisure "Leisure"). So when a
customer says they need [Ruby on
Rails](http://rubyonrails.org/ "Ruby on Rails") and I never used it
before....it's not a problem. I've seen ruby, I know python and I know
how MVC is supposed to work. Putting it all together is not that hard.
You can even hit the ground running and start working right away. Of
course you'll be a bit slower in the start but you can catch up.  So no,
I don't want to specialize. I want to know everything that is there to
know! And I believe this will make me a better engineer. Or developer.
Or person. And I believe that quality of their employees shoud matter to
the employer. It is developers who create their products. 

**You should always strive to become better!**
