---
title: Why Linux will never win the desktop
date: 2012-11-17
---

Don't get me wrong, I'm a huge linux fan. I use it on all my
machines(even my phone,
[Android](http://www.t-mobile.com/shop/phones/?capcode=AGE "Android phones")
is basically linux) and even converted my sister and a few friends. But
if you don't convert somebody, chance they'll try a new operating system
is slim to none. Only geeks like me install funky stuff as their primary
software just to try it.
But the major problem lies somewhere else. **People hate making
choices.** And linux is all about cohice. It gives you power and you
choose what you'll do with it. And it starts with selecting selecting
distribution.

[![](http://cdn.memegenerator.net/instances/400x/30362832.jpg)](http://cdn.memegenerator.net/instances/400x/30362832.jpg)

**You don't install linux.** You install a distribution. You install
[Debian](http://www.debian.org/ "Debian"),
[Ubuntu](http://www.ubuntu.com/ "Ubuntu (operating system)"),
[Slackware](http://www.slackware.com/ "Slackware"),
[Fedora](http://www.fedoraproject.org/ "Fedora (operating system)")...
There's a sea of different versions what to choose! I would even argue
that all this fragmentation hurts development. Sure it's great to have
different implementations and approaches and let time what's the best.
But there is also quite a lot of duplicate work being done. And this
cost's time and money that could be put to better use.
Back to choices. I like choice. I have a problem and need a piece of
software(or hardware) and spend a few hours(or days) browsing the web
looking at pros and cons, reading reviews, testing stuff, or just
surfing the ebay and hunt for good prices. I like to do this for fun.
But I hate doing it when I need to get something done. And most people
just need software to get stuff done. They don't care about open source
spirit or ability to hack around...they just need something that solves
their problem. And when you have a solution, why change? Why fix
something that isn't broken?

I attended a great talk on future of web search(by @dusano) and somebody
addressed this problem...”Why fix search if it ain't broken?”. Answer
was along the lines of “Because if you don't somebody else will. And he
will dominate the industry”. I'm not quite sure this is so true in the
short run. It's like with promotions in the supermarket. People are used
to buying one brand of product and consciously selecting another is
equivalent to mental **work**. And people are lazy. So they'll avoid
thinking about possibilities because frankly they don't care enough
about value/price ratio of their coffee to invest their time into it.

And it's similar when it comes to software and computers in general. A
colleague once said that people who don't understand how computers work
shouldn't be allowed to use them(he's linux sysadmin), but I strongly
disagree. People want to use computers as tools and they should be able
to. Not everybody is a developer! And that's why
[MacOS](http://www.apple.com/macosx/ "Mac OS") is popular. See
[Windows](http://www.microsoft.com/WINDOWS "Windows") is here from the
dawn of time. At least from youngster like me who used computer for the
first time in this millenia.
MacOS might be a
[BSD](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berkeley_Software_Distribution "Berkeley Software Distribution")
but it's only one and it's locked down. It doesn't give you options but
everything works. Perfect for most people.

Luckily things are changing for the better. Ubuntu broke the “easy
linux” taboo and make things friendlier. And on my laptop I have [Linux
Mint](http://www.linuxmint.com/ "Linux Mint") which is even better.
Installation is super easy and everything works out of the box. And I'm
writing this post because a friend posted a video about ElementaryOS
which is another Ubuntu fork that looks very much Mac-esque.

So things like Ubuntu, Mint or Elementary might have a fighting chance
on the desktop if they try real hard. But most of the converted users
won't know they're actually running linux under the hood. Anyway I
should stop blabbering about desktop and focus on post-pc era. But
that's a whole other story.
