---
title: Moving to Hugo
date: 2020-01-15
---

If you've been here before you might notice the site looks different. Indeed I
moved my content to yet another platform (first it was blogspot -> hakyll).

I wanted to publish something but I ran into issues: my toolchain did not work.
See, I've been doing less Haskell on my machine lately and negligence led into
my setup rotting (as I did upgrade my machine quite a bit). Truth  be told the
infrastructure was not designed to last the test of time. Anyways after a few
rounds of debugging I once decided to finally give up my complicated custom
setup and move to something off-the-shelf so I can focus on writing.

### Hakyll

This may come as a bit surprising but [Hakyll](https://jaspervdj.be/hakyll/) is
not actually a ready-made tool. Rather it's a haskell library to write your own
static page generator. This means it's super customizable but it also means you
need to own your generator and give it some love. Which I did for a while. But
when I stopped I ran into trouble.

But I wanted to keep my content. Preferably also the general architecture: keep
posts in markdown and generate static html pages for publishing.

I'm and engineer by heart and I'm the first to admit I love playing with shiny
new tools. So why not jump ship and move to something new? Maybe something
easier to maintain.

### Choosing new tools

With the hype around "JAM stack" and static page generation I imagined there is
a proliferation of tooling focusing on my issue. A web search quickly led me to
[staticgen.com](https://www.staticgen.com/) - a site dedicated to providing a
list of tools. Perfect.

Few names sounded familiar. But reading descriptions I figured out I have a few
more requirements. I don't want do deal with frontend frameworks
(React/Vue/etc) - I want my content in markdown. And I also want my tools fast,
easy to install/maintain and fully featured - no hacking to set up RSS (yes I
want to support RSS in 2020 :D).

A lot of research and playing around later I settled on
[Hugo](https://gohugo.io/). I ticks all my boxes, plus it's written in
[Go](https://golang.org/) which is probably my main language at the moment so
I'm very familiar with the tooling and thus comfortable handling
installs/maintenance.

So Hugo it is.

### The migration

Since Hugo works by the same principle - content in markdown + templates - it
was quite straightforward. Copied over my content, updated the slight
differences in metadata with a quick vim macro, whip up a basic config based on
the tutorial et voila: blog was rendering. Well I took an off the shelf template
to begin with. Then some modification to get it quite right and I was very
happy. No code to maintain, just content, template, and a config file.

### Verdict

The part that's actually impressive is the default features and speed make
for really pleasant experience. Out of the box I had automatic rebuilds with
file watching, nice error messages for when I make a mistake and even automatic
browser refreshes. And the whole thing is so quick that by the time I save in my
editor and switch to browser it already rebuilt, refreshed the page and
rendered. Feels instant. I love it.

With technical hurdles removed maybe I'll start writing more again.
